# Online Algorithms

For input sequence $P_1, P_2, \ldots, P_n$ an online algorithm must produce an
output given $P_1,P_2,\ldots,P_i$ (without seeing the ones after) for each i.

## Example: Page replacement in cache

Loading parts from disk into memory when you need it.


k is cache size (#pages)

At ith page request Pi the cache contains some k pages. If pi is not in cache
(page fault) some page must be evicted from cache to make room for pi then pi is
added to the cache.

The cost of a page replacement alg A on a sequence $P_1, \ldots P_n$ is
$f_A(p_1,\ldots P_n) = \#$ faults on $P_1,\ldots,P_n$.

Online algorithm must decide what page to evice without knowing the future
requests.

### Algorithms

#### Least Recently Used (LRU)

Evict page whose most recent request occured furthest in the past.

#### Least Frequently Used (LFU)

Evict page that has been requested least often.

#### Marking algorithm

Approximates LRU. Set a bit on each entry in page table when it's accessed. Then
you know what's recently been accessed. (with randomization).

#### FIFO

Evict page that has been in cache the longest.

## How do we decide best online algorithm?

### 1. Worst-case performance

* LRU (new page very time = n)
* Least frequently used, (new page every time = n)
* FIFO (new page every time = n)

### 2. Average case performance

Assume all incoming pages are equally probable. m = total number of pages
possibly requested.

Expected # page faults on sequence of randomly, uniformly, independently chosen
pages.

* LRU, LFU, FIFO, expected = $(1 - \frac km)n$

Average case isn't typically useful, unless analyzing program traces.

### 3. Competitive Analysis

Have the algorithms compete against each other. How doe the online algorithm
performance compare to the optimal/best offline algorithm?

n online algorithm A is c-competitive if for all $P_1P_2P_n$,
$f_A(p_1,\ldots,p_n) \leq c f_{OPT}(p_1,\ldots,p_n) + b$

Theorem: LRU and FIFO are k-competitive.

Theorem: If A is a deterministic online algorithm, for paging, then $C \geq k$.

Marking algorithms can do better.
